The President:
On Monday, the Banking Committee of the United States Senate will
debate a proposal to address the
abuse and excess that led to the
worst financial
crisis in generations.
These reforms are essential.
As I've urged over
the past year,
we need common-sense rules
that will our allow markets to
function fairly and freely while
reining in the worst practices
of the financial industry.
That's the central
lesson of this crisis.
And we fail to heed that
lesson at our peril.
Of course, there were many
causes of the economic turmoil
that ripped through our country
over the past two years.
But it was a crisis that began
in our financial system.
Large banks engaged in reckless
financial speculation without
regard for the consequences -- and without tough oversight.
Financial firms invented and
sold complicated financial
products to escape scrutiny
and conceal enormous risk.
And there were some who engaged
in the rampant exploitation of
consumers to turn a quick profit
no matter who was hurt in the process.
Now, I have long been a vigorous
defender of free markets.
And I believe we need a strong
and vibrant financial sector so
that businesses can get
loans and families can afford
mortgages; entrepreneurs can find the capital to start a new
company, sell a new product,
or offer a new service.
But what we have seen over the
past two years is that without
reasonable and clear rules
to check abuse and protect
families, markets
don't function freely.
In fact, it was
just the opposite.
In the absence of such rules,
our financial markets spun out
of control, credit
markets froze,
and our economy nearly plummeted
into a second Great Depression.
That's why financial
reform is so necessary.
After months of bipartisan
work, Senator Chris Dodd and his
committee have offered a
strong foundation for reform,
in line with the proposal
I previously laid out,
and in line with the reform
bill passed by the House.
It would provide greater
scrutiny of large financial
firms to prevent any one company
from threatening the entire
financial system -- and it
would update the rules so that
complicated financial products like derivatives are no longer
bought and sold
without oversight.
It would prevent banks from
engaging in risky dealings
through their own hedge
funds -- while finally giving
shareholders a say on
executive salaries and bonuses.
And through new tools to break
up failing financial firms,
it would help ensure that
taxpayers are never again forced
to bail out a big bank because
it's "too big to fail."
Finally, these reforms include
a new Consumer Financial
Protection Agency.
It would prevent predatory loan practices and other abuses to
ensure that consumers get clear information about loans and
other financial products before they sign on the dotted line.
Because this financial crisis
wasn't just the result of
decisions made by
large financial firms;
it was also the result of many
decisions made by ordinary
Americans to open credit
cards and take on mortgages.
And while there were many who
took out loans they knew they
couldn't afford, there were also
millions of people who signed
contracts they didn't fully
understand offered by lenders
who didn't always
tell the truth.
This is in part because the
job of protecting consumers is
spread across seven
different federal agencies,
none of which has the interests
of ordinary Americans as its
principal concern.
This diffusion of responsibility
has made it easier for credit
card companies to lure customers
with attractive offers and then
punish them in the fine print;
or for payday lenders and others
who charge outrageous interest
rates to operate without much
oversight; and for mortgage
brokers to entice homebuyers
with low initial rates only
to trap them with ballooning
payments down the line.
For these banking
reforms to be complete --
for these reforms to meet the
measure of the crisis we've just
been through -- we need a consumer agency to advocate for
ordinary Americans and help enforce the rules that protect them.
That's why I won't accept any
attempts to undermine the
independence of this agency.
And I won't accept efforts to
create loopholes for the most
egregious abusers of consumers,
from payday lenders to auto
finance companies to
credit card companies.
Unsurprisingly, this proposal
has been a source of contention
with financial firms who like
things just the way they are.
In fact, the Republican leader
in the House reportedly met with
a top executive of one of
America's largest banks and made
thwarting reform a key part of
his party's pitch for campaign contributions.
And this week, the allies
of bank and consumer finance
companies launched a
multimillion dollar ad campaign
to fight against the proposal.
You might call this 'air
support' for the army of
lobbyists already arm twisting
members of the committee to
reject those reforms and
block this consumer agency.
Perhaps that's why, after months
of working with Democrats,
Republicans walked away
from this proposal.
I regret that and urge
them to reconsider.
The fact is, it's now been well
over a year since the near
collapse of the entire
financial system --
a crisis that helped wipe out
more than 8 million jobs and
that continues to exact a
terrible toll throughout our economy.
Yet today the very same system
that allowed this turmoil
remains in place.
No one disputes that.
No one denies that
reform is needed.
So the question we have to
answer is very simple: will we
learn from this crisis, or will
we condemn ourselves to repeat it?
That's what's at stake.
I urge those in the Senate who
support these reforms to remain
strong, to resist the pressure
from those who would preserve
the status quo, to stand up
for their constituents and our country.
And I promise to use every tool
at my disposal to see these
reforms enacted: to ensure
that the bill I sign into law
reflects not the special
interests of Wall Street,
but the best interests
of the American people.
Thank you.